<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  </head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h1 id="page_4" class="calibre1"><span id="sec-1-introduction"></span>1 Introduction</h1>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<h2 id="sec-1-1-background" class="calibre5">1.1 Background</h2>
<p class="calibre6">The Standard Matchplay Rules (SMR) represent a significant shift in the way that the rules of table soccer, or foosball, are imagined and presented.</p>
<p class="calibre6">The project was born from a recognition that the 2016 ITSF rulebook was showing its age; from the original ruleset adopted by the ITSF, successive changes resulted in a document that was in need of a refresh.</p>
<p class="calibre6">To serve these ends a new scheme was created; the SMR introduced a novel terminology consistently applied in the description of the matchplay processes and proscriptive rules.</p>
<p class="calibre6">SMR Version 1.0 was the first deliverable in this project, a strict ‘translation’ of the 2016 rulebook that did not include any rules changes. Avoiding rule changes allowed errors and omissions to be more readily identified, so that corrections and clarifications resulting from feedback could then be applied and released as SMR Version 1.1. Neither of the Version 1 documents included any rules changes.</p>
<p class="calibre6">Now that the SMR has stabilised, rule changes can be introduced, and SMR Version 2.0 is the first document in the SMR series to include changes to the rules.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<h2 id="sec-1-2-philosophy" class="calibre5">1.2 Philosophy</h2>
<p class="calibre6">The bedrock of the Matchplay Rules is a set of definitions which are referenced throughout the document. The consistent use of a coherent set of definitions encapsulates complexity, which allows the rules to be both precise and brief. It also minimises ambiguity, subjectivity, redundancy and contradiction within the document.</p>
<p class="calibre6">The objective of the SMR approach is to facilitate:</p>
<p class="calibre7">● rule interpretation and refereeing</p>
<p class="calibre7">● accurate translation into other languages</p>
<p class="calibre7">● the creation of ITSF Matchplay rule books for other event types</p>
<p class="calibre7">● the introduction of a standard foosball terminology</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<h2 id="sec-1-3-document-structure" class="calibre5">1.3 Document Structure</h2>
<p class="calibre6">Italicised words or phrases are defined terms, which are collected and ordered alphabetically in the</p>
<p class="calibre6"><a href="02-definitions.xhtml#page_6">Definitions</a> section.</p>
<p class="calibre6">The sections generally follow a common pattern, the first part of which typically describes what the players can or must do. The next part contains proscriptive rules, which state what a player must not do, and the penalty to be paid for infraction.</p>
<p class="calibre6">Rules and penalties are named, rather than numbered. The details of the process to follow for each</p>
<p class="calibre6">penalty are collected in a separate <a href="18-penalties.xhtml#page_40">Penalties</a> section.</p>
<p class="calibre6">Matchplay rules sometimes contain interpretations. While interpretations are not formal rules, they are useful for communicating how common or edge cases are handled.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<h2 id="page_5" class="calibre5"><span id="sec-1-4-interpretation-of-rules"></span>1.4 Interpretation of Rules</h2>
<p class="calibre6">If any ambiguity or conflict is found in the rules the following process should be used to attempt resolution:</p>
<p class="calibre7">1. The English language version of this document takes precedence over translations.</p>
<p class="calibre7">2. Assume the rules and definitions are complete and cover the case even by omission.</p>
<p class="calibre7">3. Refer to the interpretations.</p>
<p class="calibre7">4. Request an interpretation from the ITSF Rules Commission.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<h2 id="sec-1-5-scope" class="calibre5">1.5 Scope</h2>
<p class="calibre6">This document defines the ITSF Standard Matchplay rules of Table Soccer, or foosball, covering the matchplay rules for both standard singles and standard doubles events played on a single table. Matchplay rules for other event types are not described in this document.</p>
<p class="calibre6">The Standard Matchplay Rules define how matches are played; they do not cover all aspects of tournament conduct, substance use or the dress code.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
</body></html>