<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_10" class="section-title"><span id="sec-4-the-prelude"></span>4 The Prelude</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">match</i> begins with the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i>, a process which includes the following sequence of events:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">●</i> Perform the <i class="defined-term">initial flip</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Choose the first <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i> or table side</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Each <i class="defined-term">team</i> adopts their table side</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Each <i class="defined-term">team</i> adopts their initial playing positions</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Agree on the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Agree to begin play</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> begins with the <i class="defined-term">initial flip</i>, typically a coin toss between one player from each <i class="defined-term">team</i>. The winner of the <i class="defined-term">initial flip</i> has the option of either taking the first <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i> or picking the table side for the first <i class="defined-term">game</i>, with the loser of the <i class="defined-term">initial flip</i> taking the remaining option. Once the winning <i class="defined-term">team</i> makes their choice they cannot change their decision.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">team</i> with the option to pick the table side must then do so, and each <i class="defined-term">team</i> must adopt their nominated side. In standard doubles the <i class="defined-term">team</i> with the first <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i> must adopt their respective playing positions before the other <i class="defined-term">team</i>; one player controls the <i class="defined-term">goalkeeper rod</i> and the 2-rod and the other player controls the 5-rod and the 3-rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> either <i class="defined-term">team</i> can practice in order to evaluate the condition of the table, check that the table is level, and to test the table sides and the balls.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> is also an opportunity to perform routine maintenance and if necessary to request <i class="defined-term">table maintenance; o</i>nce <i class="defined-term">active play</i> has begun <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i> can only be called for a sudden alteration to the table. Either <i class="defined-term">team</i> can request a referee during the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players should initiate and complete the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> in a timely manner. <i class="defined-term">Time-outs</i> are not allowed during the <i class="defined-term">prelude.</i> A referee has the authority to call conduct violations during the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When both <i class="defined-term">teams</i> agree that they are ready to play, the <i class="defined-term">team</i> which has the <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i> initiates the <i class="defined-term">ready protocol</i>. The <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> ends when the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i> asks “Ready?” whereupon all matchplay rules are in force.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-4-1-ball-supply" class="subsection-title">4.1 Ball Supply</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> the players must agree on the set of balls that will be used during the <i class="defined-term">match</i>. If there is disagreement then new balls must be used. This set of balls constitutes the <i class="defined-term">ball supply.</i> Once the first <i class="defined-term">opening sequence</i> of the <i class="defined-term">match</i> has begun permission must be obtained to add a ball to or remove a ball from the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The player with the <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i> has the choice of which ball is selected from the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i>. Once the <i class="defined-term">ready protocol</i> has begun the ball can be exchanged with permission during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> or a <i class="defined-term">break</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-ball-exchange"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Ball Exchange</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not exchange the ball in play with another from the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i> without permission. Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-ball-supply-change"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Ball Supply Change</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not add a ball into or remove a ball from the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i> without permission. Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_11" class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-ball-replacement-request-declined"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Ball Replacement Request Declined</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, if a player makes a request to replace the ball then the referee shall determine if the ball is fit for play. If the ball is declared unfit for play it shall be replaced, otherwise it shall not be replaced and there shall be a penalty for the requesting team. Penalty: Charged Time-out</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
