<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_15" class="section-title"><span id="sec-6-possession"></span>6 Possession</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The concept of <i class="defined-term">possession</i> relates to which rod, and by extension which player and team, has ownership of the ball at any point in time. <i class="defined-term">Possession</i> is either <i class="defined-term">active possession</i>, <i class="defined-term">paused possession</i> or <i class="defined-term">implicit possession</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Active possession</i> on a rod begins when the ball is <i class="defined-term">reachable</i> by that rod during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, and ends when the ball is no longer <i class="defined-term">reachable</i>. <i class="defined-term">Active possession</i> is <i class="defined-term">time-limited</i>; the duration of the possession is measured by a <i class="defined-term">possession clock</i> and limited by the rules.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Paused possession</i> is when a player has possession of the ball on a rod during a <i class="defined-term">pause</i> or <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Implicit possession</i> is when the ball is about to be given to a specific rod to be put into play following a <i class="defined-term">dead ball</i>, a <i class="defined-term">ball off table</i>, a <i class="defined-term">goal scored</i> or an <i class="defined-term">infraction interrupt</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In a refereed match <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> time limits are enforced by the referee; players cannot declare possession time infractions. In an unrefereed <i class="defined-term">match</i>, a player who believes that a possession time limit is being breached may <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> play in order to request a referee. The player with possession will then <i class="defined-term">restart</i> play with the <i class="defined-term">match</i> under referee time control.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a spinning <i class="defined-term">ball</i> becomes <i class="defined-term">unreachable</i> anywhere behind the 2-rod, the <i class="defined-term">possession clock</i> is suspended until the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">reachable</i> or <i class="defined-term">dead</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-time-limit-on-3-rod"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Time Limit on 3-rod</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A single <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> on the 3-rod must not exceed 15 seconds. Penalty: Goalie rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-time-limit-on-5-rod"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Time Limit on 5-rod</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A single <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> on the 5-rod must not exceed 10 seconds. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-time-limit-on-goalie-rods"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Time Limit on Goalie Rods</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A single <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> on the <i class="defined-term">goalie rods</i> must not exceed 15 seconds. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-6-1-relinquishing-possession-of-a-precarious-ball" class="subsection-title">6.1 Relinquishing Possession of a Precarious Ball</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of a ball that is <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and precariously close to the goal has the option to relinquish <i class="defined-term">possession</i> to the opposing team’s 5-rod prior to expiry of the <i class="defined-term">goalie rod possession</i> time.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The ball is considered to be <i class="defined-term">precarious</i> if it’s <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and if any part of the ball is behind the <i class="defined-term">goalkeeper rod</i> and directly in front of the goalmouth, for example if it is:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● overhanging the goal line</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● <i class="defined-term">reachable</i> behind the <i class="defined-term">goalkeeper</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● pinned to the lip of the goalmouth, a goalpost or the crossbar</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player who wishes to relinquish <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of a <i class="defined-term">precarious ball</i> must initiate a <i class="defined-term">player interrupt</i> and declare that they want to relinquish the ball. If the ball is <i class="defined-term">precarious</i>, consent to reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> is implicit and the ball is then retrieved and placed at the opposing team’s central 5-rod <i class="defined-term">figure</i> for a <i class="defined-term">restart</i>. If the player believes that a <i class="defined-term">precarious ball</i> is a <i class="defined-term">dead ball</i>, the onus is on them to demonstrate that the ball is <i class="defined-term">unreachable</i> before reaching into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_16" class="body-paragraph">The ball must be <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> in order to be <i class="defined-term">precarious</i>, therefore if a player legally declares their intent to relinquish a <i class="defined-term">precarious ball</i> and the ball subsequently drops into the goal, then the goal will not count; the ball is retrieved and given to the opposing 5-rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a player declares an intent to relinquish a <i class="defined-term">moving ball</i> then they have violated the <b class="strong-text">Distracting Activity</b> rule and the opposing team has the option to continue from the <i class="defined-term">current location</i> or to take <i class="defined-term">possession</i> on their 5-rod.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
