<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_17" class="section-title"><span id="sec-7-breaks-in-play"></span>7 Breaks in Play</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">break</i> is a temporary suspension of <i class="defined-term">active play,</i> any of the following:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● pause</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ between points</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ between games</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ time-out</i>
    </p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● dead ball</i>
    </p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● ball off table</i>
    </p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● interrupt</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ player interrupt</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ infraction interrupt</i>
    </p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">○ disruption</i>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">pauses</i> are: <i class="defined-term">between points, between games,</i> and <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>. All <i class="defined-term">pauses</i> are <i class="defined-term">time-limited</i>, i.e. they have a specified maximum duration.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">An <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> is an exceptional <i class="defined-term">break</i> in play which can occur at any time, i.e. during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, during a <i class="defined-term">break</i>, or during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> that follows a <i class="defined-term">break</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Although some <i class="defined-term">breaks</i> are not <i class="defined-term">time-limited</i>, the ball should always be put back into play as soon as possible. If the referee announces “Play!”, the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> process begins and the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i> must put the ball back into play without delay.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-7-1-pauses" class="subsection-title">7.1 Pauses</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">pause</i> is a routine <i class="defined-term">break</i> in <i class="defined-term">active play</i> which is <i class="defined-term">time-limited</i>, meaning that it must not exceed a maximum duration specified as follows:</p>
    <table class="rules-table rules-table-duration-last">
      <caption>Table: Time management for <i class="defined-term">pauses</i></caption>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Pause</th>
          <th scope="col">Pause begins when</th>
          <th scope="col">Maximum duration</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Between points</i>
          </td>
          <td>Goal scored that does not end the <i class="defined-term">game</i></td>
          <td>5 seconds</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Between games</i>
          </td>
          <td>Goal scored that ends the <i class="defined-term">game</i></td>
          <td>90 seconds</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Time-out</i>
          </td>
          <td>Player calls a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i></td>
          <td>30 seconds</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The referee may use a timer to enforce the limits during a <i class="defined-term">pause</i>. <i class="defined-term">Pauses</i> can be terminated before the time limit expires by the verbal agreement of both teams. When the <i class="defined-term">pause</i> ends the ball must be put into play with a <i class="defined-term">restart</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h3 id="sec-7-1-1-point-scored" class="subsubsection-title">7.1.1 Point Scored</h3>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A goal is scored when the ball completely crosses the goal line. If the goal is legally scored then a point is awarded to the appropriate team, who must record it on the relevant <i class="defined-term">tally markers</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The team that conceded the point then puts the ball into play with a <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If both teams agree that a point was not marked for a goal scored earlier in the same game, then the point shall be given. If the teams do not agree then no point shall be given.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_18" class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-mark"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Mark</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not mark up a point for a goal that was not legally scored. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot. <i class="defined-term">Head referee</i> discretion,</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">possible forfeiture of <i class="defined-term">game</i> or <i class="defined-term">match</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. If the ball completely crosses the goal line and then leaves the goal, it’s still a goal.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. Inadvertent errors in score marking are not subject to penalty.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. An own goal scored as a result of an infraction by the same team will effectively count,</p>
    <p class="spacer">because the opposing team has the option to continue play from the current position.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span class="run-in-subheading"> 7.1.1.1  Between Points</span>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The maximum duration of the pause <i class="defined-term">between points</i> is 5 seconds, a period which may be terminated early by agreement of the teams.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Between points</i> both teams are allowed to:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● change playing positions (in standard doubles)</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i></p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span class="run-in-subheading"> 7.1.1.2  Between Games</span>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The maximum duration of the pause <i class="defined-term">between games</i> is 90 seconds, a period which may be terminated early by agreement of the teams.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Between games</i> both teams are allowed to:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● practice</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● change table sides (where permitted)</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● change playing positions (in standard doubles)</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● change handles (where permitted)</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> taken <i class="defined-term">between games</i> counts towards the total in the following <i class="defined-term">game</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After completion of the first <i class="defined-term">game</i> played, either team may request a change of table sides, in which case the teams must change sides. If the teams do change sides then they must subsequently change sides after every <i class="defined-term">game</i> in the <i class="defined-term">match</i>, but if they do not change sides after the first <i class="defined-term">game</i> played then the teams must stay on the same sides for the entire <i class="defined-term">match</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Under some circumstances the <i class="defined-term">tournament director</i> may generally disallow changing table sides.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h3 id="sec-7-1-2-time-out" class="subsubsection-title">7.1.2 Time-out</h3>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> is a <i class="defined-term">pause</i> during which the players may leave the table and converse with each other and with other people. The maximum duration of a time-out is 30 seconds.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Each team has two <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> per <i class="defined-term">game</i>. The number of available <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> decreases when a team legally calls a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> or when the referee charges a team with a <i class="defined-term">time-ou</i>t. A <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> taken between <i class="defined-term">games</i> counts towards the total in the following <i class="defined-term">game</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_19" class="body-paragraph">A team can call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> if they have <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> of the ball</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● during any of the following <i class="defined-term">breaks</i> and the subsequent <i class="defined-term">restart</i>:</p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ a <i class="defined-term">pause, i.e.</i></p>
    <p class="nested-bullet-paragraph">■ <i class="defined-term">between points</i></p>
    <p class="nested-bullet-paragraph">■ <i class="defined-term">between games</i></p>
    <p class="nested-bullet-paragraph">■ <i class="defined-term">time-out</i></p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ <i class="defined-term">dead ball</i></p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ <i class="defined-term">ball off table</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Teams are not permitted to call <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> during <i class="defined-term">interrupts</i>, nor during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> which follows an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> to <i class="defined-term">active play</i> unless they have <i class="defined-term">possession</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the requesting team has <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> of a <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> ball then the <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> begins immediately. However, if the ball is <i class="defined-term">moving</i> then <i class="defined-term">active play</i> continues and the <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> begins only when the ball stops <i class="defined-term">moving</i> under <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of the same rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A team is deemed to have called a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> if a player on that team releases both handles for more than three seconds, or releases both handles and turns away from the table.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The team requesting the <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> must mark it on the relevant <i class="defined-term">tally marker</i> if the table has them.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> any player may reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> in order to lubricate their rods or wipe the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i>. The ball may be <i class="defined-term">handled</i> only with permission, after which it must be replaced in the same position. Players are not allowed to practice during a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> ends when the 30 second period has expired, or earlier by agreement of both teams. If a referee is present they will instruct the teams when play must <i class="defined-term">restart</i>; any delay is then subject to <b class="strong-text">Delay of Game</b> infraction. In standard doubles, players in either team may switch positions when returning to the table. After the <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> ends play is <i class="defined-term">restarted</i> by the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-time-out-limit"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Time-out Limit</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A team must not call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> when they have none remaining in the <i class="defined-term">game</i>. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">game</i>:</p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ During <i class="defined-term">active play</i>: 5-rod Possession Award ○ During a <i class="defined-term">pause</i> or <i class="defined-term">restart</i>: Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">game</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-charged-time-out-with-none-remaining"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Charged Time-out With None Remaining</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A team must not be charged with a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> when they have none remaining. Penalty: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-time-out"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Time-out</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A team must not call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> if they do not have <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of the ball. A team must not perform a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i> or a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> immediately after requesting a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>. Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-double-time-out"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Double Time-out</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Once a team initiates the <i class="defined-term">opening sequence</i> following a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> that they called <i class="defined-term">during active</i> play, they must not call another <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> before performing a <i class="defined-term">transition</i>. Penalty: Goalie rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-disallowed-time-out"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Disallowed Time-out</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>:</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_20" class="list-paragraph">● during an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> following an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> to <i class="defined-term">active play</i> if their team does not have <i class="defined-term">possession</i> Penalty: Time-out disallowed</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-premature-transition"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Premature Transition</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When <i class="defined-term">restarting</i> play after a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> taken during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, once the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i> assumes control of the rod of <i class="defined-term">possession</i> the ball must not be <i class="defined-term">transitioned</i> prior to the start of the <i class="defined-term">ready protocol.</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. In standard doubles it is a <i class="defined-term">distraction</i> for a player to perform a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> at the same time as,</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">or immediately after their partner calls a <i class="defined-term">time-out.</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. It is a <i class="defined-term">distraction</i> if a player requests a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> and then loses <i class="defined-term">possession</i> before the ball</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">stops <i class="defined-term">moving.</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. After calling a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>, <i class="defined-term">active play</i> continues until the ball stops <i class="defined-term">moving</i>. Therefore before the</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">ball comes to rest a player is at risk of, for example, exceeding the <i class="defined-term">possession</i> time limit or scoring an own goal.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">4. After the <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> begins, an inadvertent <i class="defined-term">transfer</i> or <i class="defined-term">transition</i> is not an infraction; the ball is</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">returned to its original location.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">5. A player in possession of a <i class="defined-term">stopped ball</i> may release both handles for up to three seconds,</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">e.g. to wipe sweat away.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-7-2-dead-ball" class="subsection-title">7.2 Dead Ball</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A ball is <i class="defined-term">dead</i> if it is <i class="defined-term">stationary</i> and not <i class="defined-term">reachable</i>. A ball is declared <i class="defined-term">dead</i> by the referee, or in the absence of a referee, by agreement of the teams.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">dead ball</i> is put back into play without delay with a <i class="defined-term">restart</i> from the specified location:</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Location of dead ball</th>
          <th scope="col">Where to restart</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>Between the 5-rods</td>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Kick-off</i>
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Behind the 5-rod</td>
          <td>Any <i class="defined-term">figure</i> on the nearest <i class="defined-term">goalie rod</i></td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-playing-the-ball-dead"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Playing the Ball Dead</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not intentionally play the ball <i class="defined-term">dead</i>. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-flex-infraction"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Flex Infraction</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not make <i class="defined-term">contact</i> with an otherwise <i class="defined-term">unreachable</i> ball by <i class="defined-term">flexing</i> a rod. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. A ball stuck in a serving hole or on top of the goalkeeper rod is a dead ball.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. A player must not play the ball dead by moving the ball out of reach by upward movements of</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">the <i class="defined-term">figure</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="page_21" class="subsection-title"><span id="sec-7-3-ball-off-table"></span>7.3 Ball off Table</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The ball is declared <i class="defined-term">off table</i> by the referee, or in the absence of a referee, by agreement of the teams. The team responsible for the <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> which played the <i class="defined-term">ball off table</i> is identified, and the ball is put back into play without delay at the <i class="defined-term">goalie rod</i> of the other team.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the ball cannot be retrieved within a reasonable time then it should be abandoned and a new ball taken from the <i class="defined-term">ball supply</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In general, if the ball strikes a ‘gameplay’ table component then <i class="defined-term">active play</i> continues uninterrupted, and if it strikes a ‘non-gameplay’ table component then the <i class="defined-term">ball is off table</i> and <i class="defined-term">active play</i> stops.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A gameplay component is any table element internal to the table which is necessary for gameplay, including the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i>, playing <i class="defined-term">figures</i>, bumpers, springs, side strips, ramps, side walls, end walls and the length of the rods internal to the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>. The goal posts and crossbars are considered to be gameplay components even if portions of them are outside the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Non-gameplay components include <i class="defined-term">tally markers,</i> table fixtures, objects placed on the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i>, and anything that is external to the frame of the table, for example, the external parts of the rods, the handles, and any serving cup.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The goal assemblies and the top of the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i> are boundary cases; although they are not gameplay components, the ball remains in play if it strikes one of them and returns to the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>. However, <i class="defined-term">tally markers</i> are always out of play, even if they are part of a goal assembly.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The ball is <i class="defined-term">off table</i> if it leaves the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> and:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● strikes a person or any object outside the table (e.g. the floor, ceiling or wall of the room)</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● strikes a <i class="defined-term">tally marker</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● strikes any fixture attached to the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i> excluding the goal assembly</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● strikes a foreign object resting on the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● comes to rest on the top of the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The ball is not <i class="defined-term">off table</i> and <i class="defined-term">active play</i> continues uninterrupted if it returns to the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> after:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● striking a goal post or crossbar</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● striking any part of a goal assembly excluding a <i class="defined-term">tally marker</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● bouncing or rolling on the top of the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● entering a serving hole from the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">●</i> going airborne directly above the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> or the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-airborne-catch"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Airborne Catch</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not catch or otherwise intentionally interact with a ball that is airborne above the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> or the <i class="defined-term">cabinet</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Penalty Shot; if the Penalty Shot is not scored: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-aerial"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Aerial</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> that causes the ball to directly overfly an opponent’s rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. A defensive block or an immediate defensive reaction is not a controlled transition.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. Examples of cabinet fixtures include: a light fitting, camera or microphone.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="page_22" class="subsection-title"><span id="sec-7-4-interrupts"></span>7.4 Interrupts</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">An <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> is an exceptional <i class="defined-term">break</i> in play which is not <i class="defined-term">time-limited</i>, one of the following:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● player interrupt</i>
    </p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● infraction interrupt</i>
    </p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">
      <i class="defined-term">● disruption</i>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">player interrupt</i> is a <i class="defined-term">break</i> initiated by one of the players at the table. An <i class="defined-term">infraction interrupt</i> is initiated by the referee if one is present, or if there is no referee, by one of the players. A <i class="defined-term">disruption</i> is an interruption to play which is not initiated by a player or referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> occurs during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> then the ball should be <i class="defined-term">held</i> by whichever player has or next gains <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i> of the ball. <i class="defined-term">Active play</i> is suspended while the <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> is processed.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When the <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> has been resolved, or when the referee announces “Play!”, the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i> must put the ball back into play with a <i class="defined-term">restart</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h3 id="sec-7-4-1-player-interrupt" class="subsubsection-title">7.4.1 Player Interrupt</h3>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In exceptional situations a player can interrupt <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, for example in order to:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Declare a rule infraction in the absence of a referee</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Ask permission to clean the ball or <i class="defined-term">playing area</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Request <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Relinquish <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of a <i class="defined-term">precarious ball</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Request a referee</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Appeal a referee decision</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Request a <i class="defined-term">medical break</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Tighten a loose handle</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">It is the responsibility of the player to ensure that a <i class="defined-term">player interrupt</i> is initiated in a timely manner, otherwise they may be in violation of one of the Distraction rules.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players are permitted to ask the referee or other players a brief question during a <i class="defined-term">break</i> in play or during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i>, for example to query the event format or the number of remaining <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i>. Time control is still in effect.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h3 id="sec-7-4-2-disruption" class="subsubsection-title">7.4.2 Disruption</h3>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">disruption</i> is an interruption to play which is not initiated by a player or referee, for example a sudden failure of a table component or an external event unrelated to matchplay. Examples of disruptions include:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● A <i class="defined-term">figure</i> breaking</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● A lighting failure</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● A foreign object entering the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Consequential interference from a <i class="defined-term">spectator</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● A tournament organiser asking play to stop</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a <i class="defined-term">disruption</i> occurs which materially impacts the outcome of a play, then the <i class="defined-term">disrupted</i> play shall not stand, but shall be replayed with a <i class="defined-term">restart</i> from the rod which last had <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h3 id="page_23" class="subsubsection-title"><span id="sec-7-4-3-infraction-interrupt"></span>7.4.3 Infraction Interrupt</h3>
    <p class="body-paragraph">An <i class="defined-term">infraction interrupt</i> is a short <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> that occurs when an infraction is declared, during which the infraction is processed and the appropriate penalty, if any, is determined and applied.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">An infraction is processed according to the following steps:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The infraction is declared and play is suspended</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The ball is <i class="defined-term">held</i> as soon as possible</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The <i class="defined-term">current location</i> of the ball is noted</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The location of the ball when the infraction occurred is noted</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The appropriate penalty, if any, is determined and applied</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After the infraction has been processed play continues in accordance with the rules.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When an infraction is declared, <i class="defined-term">active play</i> is suspended and the ball must be <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and <i class="defined-term">held</i> by whichever player next gains <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i> of the ball. This is the <i class="defined-term">current location</i> for infraction processing.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a team commits an infraction during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> then any play by that team resulting from or directly following the infraction shall not count. However, the non-offending team shall also have the additional option to continue play from the <i class="defined-term">current location</i> of the ball, unless the penalty indicated by the rule is only a warning.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. If a team scores a goal directly following their infraction then the goal shall not count, but if</p>
    <p class="spacer">they score an own goal then the non-offending team has the option to continue from the current location, and so the goal shall count.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span class="run-in-subheading"> 7.4.3.1  Without a Referee</span>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In an unrefereed <i class="defined-term">match</i> any player can declare an infraction by calling “Stop!”.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Rule infractions should be declared as soon as possible after they occur. In the case of an infraction during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> the non-offending team will lose the option to declare the infraction once they subsequently perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i>, in which case they are deemed to have implicitly taken their option to continue play from the <i class="defined-term">current location</i> of the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If <i class="defined-term">active play</i> ends following an infraction, for example if a goal is scored, then the non-offending team should declare any infraction as soon as possible.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players should resolve any disagreement in an amicable manner, and are permitted to use compromise to do so. If the players cannot resolve the disagreement then a referee should be requested.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span class="run-in-subheading"> 7.4.3.2  With a Referee</span>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In a refereed match the players are not permitted to declare infractions. The referee will declare an infraction by calling “Stop!”. Under certain circumstances the referee might delay interrupting play until the outcome of a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> is clear.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A referee’s ruling can be based on information obtained from the players, from <i class="defined-term">spectators</i>, from other referees and from any available video recordings.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="page_24" class="subsection-title"><span id="sec-7-5-medical-break-request"></span>7.5 Medical Break Request</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player may request a <i class="defined-term">medical break</i> at any time outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, or during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> by performing a <i class="defined-term">player interrupt</i> when the ball is <i class="defined-term">stopped</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The outcome of the request will be determined by the referee, who may also involve the <i class="defined-term">tournament director</i>. In an unrefereed <i class="defined-term">match</i> the request must go directly to the <i class="defined-term">tournament director</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the request is approved the maximum duration of the <i class="defined-term">medical break</i> will be communicated to the players.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-medical-break-request-declined"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Medical Break Request Declined</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">There is a penalty if the request for a <i class="defined-term">medical break</i> is declined. Penalty: Charged Time-out</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-medical-break-expiry"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Medical Break Expiry</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The player must be ready to play after their <i class="defined-term">medical break</i> period has expired. Penalty: Forfeit Match</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-7-6-practice" class="subsection-title">7.6 Practice</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Practice is permitted on any table during the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i> and <i class="defined-term">between games</i>. Practice is not permitted during any other <i class="defined-term">breaks.</i> Performing a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i> or a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> outside of <i class="defined-term">active play</i> is considered to be practice, except when permitted in order to position the ball when putting it into play.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-practice"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Practice</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i> or a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> during a <i class="defined-term">break</i>, other than <i class="defined-term">between games</i> and where permitted in order to position the ball when putting it into play. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">match</i>:</p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ If the offending team has <i class="defined-term">possession</i>: 5-rod Possession Award ○ If the offending team does not have <i class="defined-term">possession</i>: Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. Inadvertently moving the ball is not illegal practice; a referee will use discretion.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
