<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_26" class="section-title"><span id="sec-9-referee"></span>9 Referee</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Matchplay rules should be respected regardless of the presence of a referee, however if a referee is officiating then infractions cannot be declared by the players, but only by the referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The referee’s authority must be respected at all times during the <i class="defined-term">match</i>, and begins when both teams are at the table. A referee’s instructions must be obeyed during a <i class="defined-term">match</i>. Referee judgements must not be challenged, and players are reminded that human error is part of the game.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-arguing"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Arguing</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not argue with an officiating referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-9-1-referee-instructions" class="subsection-title">9.1 Referee Instructions</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players must be familiar with the following instructions which a referee may issue to indicate the end of a <i class="defined-term">break</i> in play:</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Referee call</th>
          <th scope="col">Reason</th>
          <th scope="col">Player action</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>“Time!”</td>
          <td>The maximum time allowed for the <i class="defined-term">pause</i> has expired</td>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Restart</i>
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>“Play!”</td>
          <td>Play must now begin</td>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Restart</i>
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players must also be familiar with the following announcements which a referee can make during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>:</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Referee call</th>
          <th scope="col">Reason</th>
          <th scope="col">Player action</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>“Stop!”</td>
          <td>Referee judgement will be given</td>
          <td>The ball must be <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and <i class="defined-term">held</i></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>“Time!”</td>
          <td>Possession time infraction</td>
          <td>The ball must be <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and <i class="defined-term">held</i></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>“Reset”</td>
          <td>Reset infraction</td>
          <td>Continue <i class="defined-term">active play</i></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>“Reset Warning”</td>
          <td>Reset infraction</td>
          <td>Continue <i class="defined-term">active play</i></td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-9-2-referee-request" class="subsection-title">9.2 Referee Request</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A referee can be requested in order to:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● provide a rule interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● resolve a controversy</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● continue the match with a referee</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In an unrefereed match a player may request a referee at any time outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, or during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> after calling “Stop!” when the ball is <i class="defined-term">stopped</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In a refereed match, a player cannot interrupt <i class="defined-term">active play</i> to request a second or replacement referee. A team who requests a second or replacement referee will be charged with a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> unless the request was made in a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> which they called.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_27" class="body-paragraph">If two referees are present, the outcome of any request for a replacement will be decided by the <i class="defined-term">head referee</i>, or if unavailable, by the <i class="defined-term">tournament director</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-referee-request"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Referee Request</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not request a second or replacement referee unless they do so during a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> called by their team.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the request was made when the team is allowed to call a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>: Charged Time-out</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the request was made at any other time: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-replacement-referee-request-declined"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Replacement Referee Request Declined</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In a <i class="defined-term">match</i> where two referees are present, there shall be a penalty if a request for a replacement referee is declined.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. In an unrefereed match, a player who does not have <i class="defined-term">possession</i> may request a referee if the</p>
    <p class="spacer">ball is <i class="defined-term">stopped</i>, e.g. if they think that the time limit for rod <i class="defined-term">possession</i> is being exceeded.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. It is considered a distraction if the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> requests a referee at the same time that</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">the <i class="defined-term">offensive player</i> performs a <i class="defined-term">transition</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-9-3-referee-appeal" class="subsection-title">9.3 Referee Appeal</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A Referee Appeal is an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> during which a player appeals to the <i class="defined-term">head referee</i> to make a ruling.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a player believes a referee at the table has incorrectly enforced or failed to enforce a rule or penalty they may formally appeal to the <i class="defined-term">head referee</i> to get a ruling. The player must inform the referee of their intent to lodge a Referee Appeal at which point the <i class="defined-term">match</i> will be interrupted until a decision is returned.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Any appeal must be lodged before the ball is put back into play. An appeal involving the outcome of a <i class="defined-term">match</i> must be lodged before the winning team has begun its next match.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">head referee</i> shall consult the matchplay rules and at least two other referees (if available) to determine whether or not the referee’s decision should be upheld or overturned.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-unreasonable-appeal"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Unreasonable Appeal</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not challenge a referee’s judgement, or make insubstantial or unreasonable appeals. Penalty: Charged Time-out</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
