<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_29" class="section-title"><span id="sec-11-passing"></span>11 Passing</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">pass</i> is considered to have occurred if the catching rod retains <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> of the ball or performs an immediate <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">There are some restrictions when passing the ball forward from the 5-rod and the <i class="defined-term">goalie rod</i>. Put simply, a ball must be <i class="defined-term">moving</i> in order to be legally passed. To appreciate the finer details it’s necessary to understand the definition of a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In the context of passing, a ball that is <i class="defined-term">stopped, pinned</i> or <i class="defined-term">adjusted</i> becomes a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball.</i> When passing from the 5-rod to the 3-rod, a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball</i> cannot be passed with either a <i class="defined-term">direct-pass</i> or with an <i class="defined-term">indirect-pass.</i> When passing from the <i class="defined-term">goalie rod</i> to the 5-rod, a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball</i> cannot be passed with a <i class="defined-term">direct-pass</i>, but it can be passed with an <i class="defined-term">indirect-pass</i>. The restriction is cleared by performing a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i>, after which the ball can be legally passed.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">There are no restrictions on passes between other rods, or on backward passes between rods.</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Passing rod</th>
          <th scope="col">Catching rod</th>
          <th scope="col">The pass is illegal if the ball is...</th>
          <th scope="col">...and the pass is...</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>5-rod</td>
          <td>3-rod</td>
          <td><i class="defined-term">Stopped</i>, <i class="defined-term">pinned</i>, <i class="defined-term">adjusted</i></td>
          <td><i class="defined-term">Direct</i> or <i class="defined-term">indirect</i></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Goalie rod</td>
          <td>5-rod</td>
          <td><i class="defined-term">Stopped</i>, <i class="defined-term">pinned</i>, <i class="defined-term">adjusted</i></td>
          <td>
            <i class="defined-term">Direct</i>
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-restricted-pass"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Restricted pass</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not <i class="defined-term">direct-pass</i> or <i class="defined-term">indirect-pass</i> a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball</i> from the 5-rod to the 3-rod. A player must not <i class="defined-term">direct-pass</i> a <i class="defined-term">restricted ball</i> from a <i class="defined-term">goalie rod</i> to the 5-rod. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. It is legal to pass a <i class="defined-term">stationary</i> ball because if the <i class="defined-term">pass</i> is immediate the ball is not <i class="defined-term">stopped</i>.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. A <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> 5–3 <i class="defined-term">pass</i> is illegal even if it <i class="defined-term">deflects</i> off the opposing 5-rod (<i class="defined-term">indirect</i>).</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. A <i class="defined-term">rocking ball</i> is a <i class="defined-term">stopped ball</i>.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">4. A <i class="defined-term">stub pass</i> is legal.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">5. Even if the catching rod performs an immediate <i class="defined-term">controlled transition,</i> it's still a pass.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">6. There are no restrictions on passing a ball if it goes through more than one of the opposing</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">team’s rods, for example if it goes off either end <i class="defined-term">wall</i>.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
