<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_30" class="section-title"><span id="sec-12-wall-contact"></span>12 Wall Contact</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">There are restrictions that govern contact between the ball and the <i class="defined-term">wall</i>, and also between the <i class="defined-term">rods</i> and the <i class="defined-term">wall.</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> on or near the <i class="defined-term">wall,</i> it must be <i class="defined-term">freed</i> by <i class="defined-term">contact</i> with a <i class="defined-term">figure</i>; it is illegal to attempt to influence the ball by any other means, e.g. by hitting a rod into the wall.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">On the 5-rod, the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> cannot exceed two during a single <i class="defined-term">active possession</i>. However, if the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">trapped</i>, multiple consecutive <i class="defined-term">wall contacts</i> may be used until the ball is <i class="defined-term">freed</i>, all of which will count as a single <i class="defined-term">wall contact.</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> touching the wall<i class="defined-term">,</i> then the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> is increased by one, but if the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> before it touches the wall<i class="defined-term">,</i> the next <i class="defined-term">wall contact</i> increases the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> by one. In both cases, any subsequent contacts with the wall do not increase the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count,</i> until the ball is <i class="defined-term">freed</i>. Once the ball is <i class="defined-term">freed</i>, each subsequent <i class="defined-term">wall contact</i> will increase the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count.</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If two or more <i class="defined-term">wall contacts</i> are used to free a <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> ball then the player must perform a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i> before <i class="defined-term">transitioning</i> the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> doesn’t increase if the ball is <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> by the 5-rod directly following a <i class="defined-term">transition</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Wall contacts are counted separately on each side of the table, however, the first wall contact on one side of the table resets the <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> on the other side.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-trapped-ball-influence"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Trapped Ball Influence</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player on the team with <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> of a <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> ball must not influence or attempt to influence the ball by hitting a rod into the wall.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-three-walls"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Three Walls</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> must not exceed two during a single <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> on the 5-rod. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-trapped-ball-transition"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Trapped Ball Transition</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If a player makes two or more <i class="defined-term">wall contacts</i> to <i class="defined-term">free</i> a <i class="defined-term">trapped</i> ball on the 5-rod<b class="strong-text">,</b> then they must not <i class="defined-term">transition</i> the ball without first performing a <i class="defined-term">transfer</i>. Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
