<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_31" class="section-title"><span id="sec-13-reaching-into-the-playing-area"></span>13 Reaching Into the Playing Area</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Consent may be required to reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>, for example, to clean the ball, wipe the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i>, or pick up a dead ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Consent is given by the referee, or in an unrefereed match, by the opposing team. Consent requested during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> is treated as a <i class="defined-term">player interrupt</i>; <i class="defined-term">active play</i> is suspended and the <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> is processed.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Consent is required in order to reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> to touch the ball except when positioning the ball where allowed during a <i class="defined-term">restart</i>. If it is demonstrated that the ball is <i class="defined-term">dead</i> or <i class="defined-term">precarious</i>, then consent is implicit and the ball may be picked up. In other cases, for example to remove oil or dirt from the ball, consent must be explicitly given.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player wishing to reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> must first request consent. Outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i> any player is free to reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> without consent provided that they do not touch the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-reaching-in-during-active-play"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Reaching In During Active Play</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During <i class="defined-term">active play</i> a player must not reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> without consent. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If a <i class="defined-term">moving ball</i> is prevented from entering their team’s goal: Point Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the player touches a <i class="defined-term">precarious ball</i> at their team’s goal: Point Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the ball is <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> and not touched during their team’s <i class="defined-term">possession</i>: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● All other cases: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-ball-handling-during-break"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Ball Handling During Break</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During a <i class="defined-term">break</i> a player must not reach into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> and touch the ball without consent, unless it is <i class="defined-term">between games</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the ball is <i class="defined-term">precarious</i> at their team’s goal: Point Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If their team has <i class="defined-term">paused possession</i>: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the other team has <i class="defined-term">paused possession</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. Outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i> a player can remove dirt or wipe marks from the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i> without consent.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. In order to tighten a handle that becomes loose during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, a player must <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i></p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">play and gain consent before reaching into the <i class="defined-term">playing area.</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. The referee may decline a request to touch the ball, for example if it is <i class="defined-term">precarious</i> or of</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">doubtful controllability.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
