<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_32" class="section-title"><span id="sec-14-switching-positions"></span>14 Switching Positions</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In standard doubles the two players on a team are allowed to switch their playing positions during a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i>, <i class="defined-term">between points</i>, <i class="defined-term">between games</i> and before and after a <i class="defined-term">penalty shot</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During these breaks both teams are free to switch positions until the <i class="defined-term">ready protocol</i> in the subsequent <i class="defined-term">restart</i> has begun. The <i class="defined-term">offensive team</i> is allowed to switch positions until they offer the “Ready?” prompt, and the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> is allowed to switch positions until they give the “Ready!” response.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After the “Ready!” response is given and prior to the start of <i class="defined-term">active play</i> neither team is allowed to switch positions unless a <i class="defined-term">time-out</i> is called.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">It is an infraction to switch positions during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players are not permitted to switch positions during the <i class="defined-term">ready protocol</i> in contravention with the above formula, or during a <i class="defined-term">dead ball</i>, a <i class="defined-term">ball off table</i>, or during any <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i>; these are not infractions but any such switch is disallowed and must be reversed. Once <i class="defined-term">active play</i> has begun, a switch which should have been disallowed is not reversed.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players are not permitted to switch positions during the <i class="defined-term">restart</i> which follows an <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i>, unless they would have been legally allowed to do so at the moment that the <i class="defined-term">interrupt</i> occurred.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the ready protocol is interrupted at any point then the “Ready?” prompt will be re-issued. Any such interrupt does not restore switching rights to either team; the <i class="defined-term">offensive team</i> cannot switch positions prior to re-issuing the “Ready?” prompt.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Switching positions must be completed in accordance with the time constraint of the break during which it is performed; any delay or disallowed switch may be grounds for a <b class="strong-text">Delay of Game</b> infraction.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-switch"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Switch</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The players in a doubles <i class="defined-term">team</i> must not switch positions during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>. Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
