<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_33" class="section-title"><span id="sec-15-impairing-play"></span>15 Impairing Play</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Distraction</i>, <i class="defined-term">reset</i> and <i class="defined-term">jar</i> are actions which impair the other team’s ability to play, and are illegal. They can be classified according to the type of impairment, as follows:</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Common name</th>
          <th scope="col">Impairment of</th>
          <th scope="col">Description</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>Distraction</td>
          <td>Attention</td>
          <td>Pulling the other team’s attention away</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Reset</td>
          <td>Control</td>
          <td>Disrupting a player’s control of the ball</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Jarring</td>
          <td>Possession</td>
          <td>Preventing a player from keeping or gaining possession</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-15-1-distraction" class="subsection-title">15.1 Distraction</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not pull the attention of the opposing team away from the game during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>. Impairing attention is a <i class="defined-term">distraction</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A referee may issue a Warning penalty for the first <i class="defined-term">distraction</i> in a <i class="defined-term">match</i>; a subsequent infraction by the same team in the same match will carry a more severe penalty. <i class="defined-term">Distractions</i> are not limited to those identified here; other actions may be grounds for a <i class="defined-term">distraction</i> call, at the discretion of the referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The manner in which players take and release control of their rods is potentially distracting. In general players should have their rods under control during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>; they can release handles, e.g. to wipe their hands, to change holds, or to move between rods, but must do so in accordance with the rules. A rod is considered to be under control when a player is holding that rod’s handle using any part of their arm from the elbow down to the fingers. This permits a variety of holds using different parts of the arm, including the fingers, hand, palm, wrist, forearm and elbow.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-distracting-activity"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Distracting Activity</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, and at the discretion of the referee, the following activities may be judged as distractions:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● making sounds, e.g. talking or shouting</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● allowing an electronic device on the player’s person to make sound</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● excessive movement of the hands between the handles</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● excessive movement of a rod that is not part of an offensive or defensive play</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● any bodily movement or gesture that is not part of an offensive or defensive play, e.g. tapping the cabinet in apology or approval</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● making contact with an opposing team’s rod, i.e. a <i class="defined-term">clash</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-rod-control"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Rod Control</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">During <i class="defined-term">active play</i> a player must not:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● control a rod using any part of their body beyond the elbow</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● in standard doubles, control a rod not designated for their position</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-movement-away"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Movement Away</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When a player has <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> on one rod, another rod on the same team must not hit the wall or be moved excessively.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_34" class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-reaching-away"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Reaching Away</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player with <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> must not <i class="defined-term">release</i> both handles and reach down or away from the table.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-distracting-transition"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Distracting Transition</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In standard doubles a player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> when they or their partner are not controlling each rod with each arm.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In standard singles a player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> on the 3-rod when their other arm is not controlling another rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-sudden-play"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Sudden Play</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In standard doubles a player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> within one second of either player on the team taking hold of the handle of any rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In standard singles a player must not perform a <i class="defined-term">controlled transition</i> on the 3-rod within one second of taking hold of the handle of any rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Distraction</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Momentary release of the handle when changing between holds prior to a <i class="defined-term">transition</i> is not in and of itself a <b class="strong-text">Sudden Play</b> infraction.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. Moving the catching rod when passing is not a distraction unless that movement is excessive.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. Spinning a rod may be considered excessive movement.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. A brief whisper by a player on a team with <i class="defined-term">active possession</i> of a <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> ball is allowed.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-15-2-reset" class="subsection-title">15.2 Reset</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Impairing a player’s ability to control the ball is illegal. A <i class="defined-term">reset</i> infraction is any s<i class="defined-term">hake</i>, <i class="defined-term">bump</i> or <i class="defined-term">shock</i> by a player on the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> that impairs the <i class="defined-term">offensive player</i>’s control of the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Upon the first infraction in a <i class="defined-term">game</i> the referee announces "Reset", indicating that the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> has committed a <i class="defined-term">reset</i> infraction This means that the non-offending team’s <i class="defined-term">possession clock</i> and 5-rod <i class="defined-term">wall contact count</i> are reset. <i class="defined-term">Active play</i> does not stop when the referee makes a reset call.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After their first “Reset” call in a <i class="defined-term">game</i>, the next infraction by the same team will be a “Reset Warning” call, and any subsequent infraction by the same team during the same point will result in a Penalty Shot. After a Penalty Shot the next infraction by the same team is a “Reset Warning” again.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">For each team, the sequence of reset infractions is as follows:</p>
    <table class="rules-table">
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th scope="col">Reset infraction sequence</th>
          <th scope="col">Referee call</th>
          <th scope="col">Active play</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>First in <i class="defined-term">game</i></td>
          <td>“Reset”</td>
          <td>Continues</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">game</i></td>
          <td>“Reset Warning” or “Warning”</td>
          <td>Continues</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">game</i> and second in point</td>
          <td>“Stop!”</td>
          <td>Stops - Penalty Shot</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In the event of <i class="defined-term">reset</i> on the 5-rod, the referee has the discretion to make a 5-rod Possession Award.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_35" class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">reset</i> occurs when a <i class="defined-term">stopped</i> ball is made to move, although a referee can judge it to have occurred even if the ball is <i class="defined-term">pinned</i> or <i class="defined-term">moving</i>. A <i class="defined-term">rocking ball</i> is not judged as a <i class="defined-term">reset</i>, however a ball that is excessively wobbling in place could be judged as a <i class="defined-term">reset</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-reset"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Reset</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player on the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> must not cause a <i class="defined-term">shake</i>, <i class="defined-term">bump</i> or <i class="defined-term">shock</i> that impairs the <i class="defined-term">offensive player</i>’s ability to control or to play the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">game</i>: Reset Call</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">game</i>: Reset Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">game</i> and second in point: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-5-rod-reset"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: 5-rod Reset</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player on the <i class="defined-term">defensive team</i> must not cause a <b class="strong-text">Reset</b> which prevents the <i class="defined-term">offensive player</i> from successfully completing a pass from the 5-rod to the 3-rod.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Reset call and 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-self-reset"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Self Reset</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player on a team with <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i> must not cause a <i class="defined-term">shake</i>, <i class="defined-term">bump</i> or <i class="defined-term">shock</i> in an attempt to elicit a <b class="strong-text">Reset</b> call from the referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1.   <i class="defined-term">Active play</i> continues after a <b class="strong-text">Reset</b> call, so the defensive team should remain alert.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-15-3-jarring" class="subsection-title">15.3 Jarring</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Impairing a player’s ability to possess the ball is illegal. A <i class="defined-term">jar</i> is any <i class="defined-term">shake</i>, <i class="defined-term">shock</i>, <i class="defined-term">slam</i>, <i class="defined-term">shift</i> or <i class="defined-term">clash</i> that impairs the other team’s ability to retain or gain <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Jarring</i> infractions can also be called at the discretion of the referee.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-jar"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Jar</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not cause a <i class="defined-term">shake</i>, <i class="defined-term">shock</i>, <i class="defined-term">slam</i>, <i class="defined-term">shift</i> or <i class="defined-term">clash</i> that impairs the other team’s ability to retain or gain <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i> of the ball. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First and second in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Restart or 5-rod Possession Award</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. A simultaneous <i class="defined-term">slam</i> and <i class="defined-term">transition</i> from the same rod may be grounds for a jarring infraction.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. Any slamming of the rod during <i class="defined-term">active play</i> may be judged a jar.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">3. A <i class="defined-term">shake</i>, <i class="defined-term">bump</i> or <i class="defined-term">shock</i> behind the rod of <i class="defined-term">possession</i> by the defending team is treated as a <i class="defined-term">jar</i> rather than a <i class="defined-term">reset</i> (i.e. when one forward impairs the <i class="defined-term">possession</i> of the other forward).</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-15-4-player-conduct" class="subsection-title">15.4 Player Conduct</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players must behave ethically and respectfully during a <i class="defined-term">match</i>. The referee has the discretion to determine the penalty or the escalation process in the case of a Conduct Violation.</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <p id="page_36" class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-cheating"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Cheating</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not cheat or attempt to cheat.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-cursing"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Cursing</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not curse.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot or Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-derogatory-comment"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Derogatory Comment</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not make derogatory or inappropriate comments about other players or officials, either directly or indirectly.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Referee discretion; possible Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-coaching"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Coaching</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not receive assistance from a <i class="defined-term">spectator</i> at any point in a <i class="defined-term">match</i>, except during <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> or <i class="defined-term">between games</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-device-usage"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Device Usage</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not use headphones, earbuds, a mobile phone or any other electronic device during a <i class="defined-term">match</i>, apart from during <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> or <i class="defined-term">between games</i>. Penalty (first in <i class="defined-term">match</i>): Warning</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty (subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>): Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-table-abuse"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Table Abuse</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not <i class="defined-term">slam</i> any rod or forcefully <i class="defined-term">shake</i> or <i class="defined-term">shift</i> the table, even outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i>. Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-aggression"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Aggression</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not threaten or behave aggressively towards any other person. Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-format-deviation"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Format Deviation</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Teams must not play a different format than the one specified for the event. Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
    <h2 id="sec-15-5-spectator-conduct" class="subsection-title">15.5 Spectator Conduct</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph"><i class="defined-term">Spectators</i> are subject to Conduct Violations at referee discretion. <i class="defined-term">Spectators</i> must not coach or distract players during <i class="defined-term">active play</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-spectator-coaching"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Spectator Coaching</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">spectator</i> must not influence or attempt to influence a <i class="defined-term">match</i> by transmitting information to a player, except during <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> or <i class="defined-term">between games</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Penalty: Conduct Violation</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-spectator-distraction"></span>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Spectator Distraction</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A <i class="defined-term">spectator</i> must not influence a match by distracting the players or the referee. Penalty: Conduct Violation, possible expulsion</p>
    <p class="spacer">&#160;</p>
  </body>
</html>
