<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_37" class="section-title"><span id="sec-16-changes-to-the-table"/>16 Changes to the Table</h1>
    <p class="spacer"> </p>
    <h2 id="sec-16-1-routine-maintenance" class="subsection-title">16.1 Routine Maintenance</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players are allowed to briefly wipe the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i> without permission outside <i class="defined-term">active play</i>, provided that no substance is used to do so.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Players may lubricate their own team’s rods during <i class="defined-term">time-outs</i> and <i class="defined-term">between games</i>. Pipette or sponge applicators must be used when applying lubricant directly to the rods. Lubricant must not be sprayed directly onto the rods, but can be applied indirectly. The Tournament Director may require the use of specific lubricant products, and may mandate specific requirements and restrictions for their use.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player can use a substance to improve handle grip provided that they ensure that it does not get into the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i> or onto the rods or the ball.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Where permitted by the <i class="defined-term">tournament director</i>, players are allowed to replace their handles with other approved handles. This can be done during any <i class="defined-term">pause</i> provided that it is done within the time limits.</p>
    <p class="spacer"> </p>
    <h2 id="sec-16-2-table-maintenance" class="subsection-title">16.2 Table Maintenance</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If there is a sudden alteration to the table or to table fixture such as the table lighting, or a foreign object enters the <i class="defined-term">playing area</i>, then the appropriate <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i> should be performed.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the table requires cleaning, approved products may be used in accordance with table manufacturer and event promoter specifications and restrictions.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the problem cannot be resolved by the players, a <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i> request should be made at the <i class="defined-term">tournament desk.</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The table may be levelled during the <i class="defined-term">prelude</i>. Once <i class="defined-term">active play</i> has started in the <i class="defined-term">match</i> a player may only request to level the table during a <i class="defined-term">pause</i>. If both teams agree to level the table then this can be done either by the players or by a <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i> request made at the <i class="defined-term">tournament desk</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After the problem is resolved, the ball shall be put back into play by the player with <i class="defined-term">possession</i>. However, if the sudden alteration was a <i class="defined-term">disruption</i> which materially impacted the outcome of a play, then the <i class="defined-term">disrupted</i> play shall not stand, but shall be replayed with a <i class="defined-term">restart</i> from the rod which last had <i class="defined-term">controlled possession</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-levelling-request"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Levelling Request</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the other team disagrees with a player’s request to level the table, then the requesting team shall call <i class="defined-term">table maintenance</i> and will be charged with a <i class="defined-term">time-out.</i> Penalty: Charged Time-out</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. Sudden alterations include: a broken playing <i class="defined-term">figure</i>, pin, screw, spring or bumper, a bent rod,</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">a failure of table lighting</p>
    <p class="spacer"> </p>
    <h2 id="page_38" class="subsection-title"><span id="sec-16-3-illegal-modification"/>16.3 Illegal Modification</h2>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not modify the playing characteristics of the table or the balls.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-table-modification"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Table Modification</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not make any modification to the playing characteristics of the table or the ball. Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot or Exclusion</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-rod-limiting"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Rod Limiting</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not use any device or object that limits the movement of a rod. Penalty: Referee discretion, possible Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-contamination"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Contamination</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not allow the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i> or the ball to become contaminated by any substance. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in match: Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-illegal-cleaning"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Illegal Cleaning</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A player must not use any substance, including saliva or sweat, to wipe marks off the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i> or the ball. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Warning</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Penalty Shot</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-substance-on-handle"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Substance on Handle</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When changing table sides <i class="defined-term">between games</i>, a player must not leave any substance on the handles. Penalty:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● First in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Warning, player is required to remove the substance within the time limits</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● Subsequent in <i class="defined-term">match</i>: Prohibition from using the substance</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">Interpretation</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">1. Examples of table modification include: filing a playing <i class="defined-term">figure,</i> sandpapering the <i class="defined-term">playfield,</i> and</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">directly applying a foreign substance to the <i class="defined-term">playfield</i>, the playing <i class="defined-term">figure</i> or the ball.</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">2. Examples of contaminants include: lubricant and substances used to improve handle grip.</p>
    <p class="spacer"> </p>
  </body>
</html>
