<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  </head>
  <body class="book-body">
    <h1 id="page_39" class="section-title"><span id="sec-17-penalty-shot"/>17 Penalty Shot</h1>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A referee can award a Penalty Shot to the non-offending team for a serious violation of the rules; these cases are explicitly identified in the relevant rules. The referee also has the discretion to award a Penalty Shot for flagrant or intentional violation of the rules.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The Penalty Shot is a single 3-rod <i class="defined-term">possession</i> awarded to the non-offending team in an attempt to score a goal against one defensive player from the offending team.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The player on the non-offending team who takes the Penalty Shot is here called the penalty taker, and the player on the offending team who defends the shot is here called the defender.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">In a standard doubles <i class="defined-term">match</i> one player from each team must leave the table before the Penalty Shot is taken. However, the players in each team may first switch positions before the two players who are not involved in the Penalty Shot leave the table.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The ball is put into play with a 3-rod <i class="defined-term">restart</i> by the penalty taker and the <i class="defined-term">transition</i> is performed. During the Penalty Shot all Standard Matchplay Rules are in force.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">If the penalty taker’s <i class="defined-term">transition</i> results in a legally scored goal, then the Penalty Shot is complete and the point is marked by the penalty taker.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">The Penalty Shot is also complete in the event of any of the following outcomes:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● A rule infraction with a penalty other than a Warning, committed by the penalty taker</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● The penalty taker’s <i class="defined-term">transition</i> goes backwards</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● After the penalty taker’s <i class="defined-term">transition</i></p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ the ball becomes <i class="defined-term">reachable</i> by the defender’s 2-rod and then subsequently becomes</p>
    <p class="deep-continuation-indent"><i class="defined-term">unreachable</i> forward of the defender’s 2-rod</p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ the ball stops <i class="defined-term">moving</i></p>
    <p class="nested-list-paragraph">○ the ball goes <i class="defined-term">off table</i></p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">When the Penalty Shot is complete, the referee may issue a Warning that further infractions by the offending team will result in forfeiture of the <i class="defined-term">game</i> or the <i class="defined-term">match</i>.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After the Penalty Shot is complete the players return to the table; in standard doubles either team may again Switch Positions.</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">After the players return to the table play continues as follows:</p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the point was scored then the offending team <i class="defined-term">restarts</i> with a <i class="defined-term">kick-off</i></p>
    <p class="list-paragraph">● If the point was not scored then <i class="defined-term">restart</i> from the location of the infraction or as specified in</p>
    <p class="continuation-indent">accordance with the rules</p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">
      <span id="rule-penalty-shot-limit"/>
      <b class="strong-text">Rule: Penalty Shot Limit</b>
    </p>
    <p class="body-paragraph">A team must not be charged with three Penalty Shots in one <i class="defined-term">game</i>. Penalty: Forfeit Game</p>
    <p class="spacer"> </p>
  </body>
</html>
