<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Standard Matchplay Rules 2024</title>
    <meta content="PDF Reflow conversion" name="generator"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="page_styles.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  </head>
  <body class="calibre">
<h1 id="page_40" class="calibre1"><span id="sec-18-penalties"></span>18 Penalties</h1>
<p class="calibre6">This section identifies the penalties for rule infractions.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-continue"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Continue</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">In the event of a rule infraction during <i class="calibre8">active play</i> for which the penalty given is not a Warning, in addition to the penalty specified below the non-offending team shall also have the option to continue from the <i class="calibre8">current location</i> of the ball.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-warning"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Warning</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">A warning indicates that a subsequent infraction of a similar nature will carry a more severe penalty.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-goalie-rod-possession-award"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Goalie rod Possession Award</b></p>
<p class="calibre6"><i class="calibre8">Possession</i> of the ball is awarded to the non-offending team for a <i class="calibre8">restart</i> on any <i class="calibre8">goalie rod figure</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-5-rod-possession-award"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: 5-rod Possession Award</b></p>
<p class="calibre6"><i class="calibre8">Possession</i> of the ball is awarded to the non-offending team for a <i class="calibre8">restart</i> at the central 5-rod <i class="calibre8">figure</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-restart-or-5-rod-possession-award"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Restart or 5-rod Possession Award</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The non-offending team can choose to <i class="calibre8">restart</i> from the location where the infraction occurred or take a 5-rod Possession Award.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-reset-call"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Reset Call</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The referee announces "Reset!" and the <i class="calibre8">possession clock</i> and <i class="calibre8">wall contact count</i> are reset. The next <i class="calibre8">reset</i> infraction will result in a Reset Warning penalty.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-reset-warning"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Reset Warning</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The referee announces "Reset Warning!" and the <i class="calibre8">possession clock</i> and <i class="calibre8">wall contact count</i> are reset.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-distraction-first-in"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Distraction (first in</b> <i class="calibre8"><b class="calibre9">match</b></i><b class="calibre9">)</b></p>
<p class="calibre7">● If deemed benign by the referee: Warning</p>
<p class="calibre7">● If a goal was scored by the offending team: Goal disallowed and 5-rod Possession Award</p>
<p class="calibre7">● All other cases: Restart or 5-rod Possession Award</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-distraction-subsequent-in"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Distraction (subsequent in</b> <i class="calibre8"><b class="calibre9">match</b></i><b class="calibre9">)</b> Referee discretion: Restart or 5-rod Possession Award, or possible Penalty Shot.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-charged-time-out"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Charged Time-out</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">A <i class="calibre8">team</i> that is charged with a <i class="calibre8">time-out</i> loses one of their remaining <i class="calibre8">time-outs</i> in the <i class="calibre8">game</i>. The <i class="calibre8">team</i> is entitled to take the full period of the <i class="calibre8">time-out</i> only if they could have legally called a <i class="calibre8">time-out</i> at that point in the <i class="calibre8">match</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-point-award"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Point Award</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The non-offending team is awarded a point. The offending team then has the <i class="calibre8">kick-off</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-forfeit-game"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Forfeit Game</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The team forfeit the <i class="calibre8">game</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-forfeit-match"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Forfeit Match</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">The team forfeit the <i class="calibre8">match</i>.</p>
<p class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-conduct-violation"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Conduct Violation</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">At the discretion of the referee, and in accordance with the severity of the infraction, any penalty from a warning to the forfeiture of a <i class="calibre8">game</i> or the <i class="calibre8">match</i>. Also, by escalation to the <i class="calibre8">head referee</i> and/or <i class="calibre8">tournament director</i>, expulsion from the tournament venue or a fine.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
<p id="page_41" class="calibre6"><span id="penalty-penalty-shot"></span><b class="calibre9">Penalty: Penalty Shot</b></p>
<p class="calibre6">See <a href="17-penalty-shot.xhtml#page_39">Penalty Shot</a> section for details.</p>
<p class="calibre4"> </p>
</body></html>